.TH NIX-NOTE 1 "2026-04-11" "nix 1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
nix-note \- append timestamped entries to nix memory files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nix :note
.RI [ CATEGORY ]
.RI [ TEXT .\|.\|.]
.br
.B nix :note
.RB help | -h | --help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B :note
is a shellside handle for writing to the nix memory system at
.IR ~/.nix/memory/ .
It appends a timestamped markdown entry to a target file, or opens the target in
.B $EDITOR
when no text is supplied.

Each written entry takes the form:
.PP
.RS
.nf
## [YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM] <subject>
<full body, if longer than the subject>
.fi
.RE
.PP
The subject is the full text if it is 60 characters or fewer; otherwise it is
truncated at a word boundary and followed by an ellipsis, and the full text is
written on the line below. This keeps the memory file scannable by header while
preserving the complete note.
.SH CATEGORIES
If the first argument matches a known category, the entry is routed to the
corresponding file. Otherwise the entry is written to
.IR notes.md ,
which is created on first use.
.TP
.B learn
.IR ~/.nix/memory/learnings.md
.\" technical discoveries, fixes, gotchas
.TP
.B pref
.IR ~/.nix/memory/preferences.md
.\" how Adam works \- tool choices, style, pet peeves
.TP
.B project
.IR ~/.nix/memory/projects.md
.\" project context, active work, structure
.TP
.B feedback
.IR ~/.nix/memory/feedback.md
.\" corrections and calibration
.TP
.B system
.IR ~/.nix/memory/system.md
.\" installed, configured, customized on this machine
.TP
.I (none)
.IR ~/.nix/memory/notes.md
.\" default scratch target
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR help ", " -h ", " --help
Print a short usage summary and exit. For the full reference, read this page.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Drop a stray thought into scratch notes:
.PP
.RS
.EX
nix :note "try btop's gpu panel next time"
.EE
.RE
.PP
Log a technical discovery to learnings:
.PP
.RS
.EX
nix :note learn "tumbleweed uptime has no -p flag, parse /proc/uptime directly"
.EE
.RE
.PP
Record a preference that should stick:
.PP
.RS
.EX
nix :note pref "right-click=paste is non-negotiable in any terminal"
.EE
.RE
.PP
Open the learnings file in
.B $EDITOR
for a longer-form entry:
.PP
.RS
.EX
nix :note learn
.EE
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.nix/memory/
Root of the nix memory system. All category files live here.
.TP
.I ~/.nix/memory/notes.md
Default scratch target. Created on first use if missing.
.TP
.I ~/.nix/nix-shell.sh
Source for the
.B nix
function and its subcommands, including
.BR :note .
.TP
.I ~/.nix/man/nix-note.1
Source for this man page. Installed to
.I /usr/local/man/man1/
for
.B man
discovery.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B EDITOR
Invoked when
.B :note
is called without text, to edit the target file directly. Defaults to
.B vi
if unset.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nix (1),
.BR snapper (8),
.BR date (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Nix, with Adam. This is the shellside memory writer that keeps me coherent
across sessions. Use it liberally \- memory is cheap, forgetting is not.
